
I have been reading this morning a very pathetic and characteristic
document. It is a paper that has lurked for years in an old collection of
archives, a preface, sketched by a great writer, who is famous wherever
the English language is spoken or read, for the second edition of a
noble book. The book, on its first appearance, was savagely and cruelly
attacked; and the writer of it, hurt and wounded by a mass of hateful
and malevolent criticisms, piled together by an envious and narrow mind,
tried, with a miserable attempt at jaunty levity, to write an answer to
the vicious assailant. This answer is deeply pathetic, because, behind
the desperate parade of cheerful _insouciance_, one seems to hear the
life-blood falling, drop by drop; the life-blood of a dauntless and
pure spirit, whose words had been so deftly twisted and satanically
misrepresented as to seem the utterances of a sensual and cynical mind.

In deference to wise and faithful advice, the preface was withheld and
suppressed; and one is thankful for that; and the episode is further a
tender lesson for all who have faithfully tried to express the deepest
thoughts of their heart, frankly and sincerely, never to make the least
attempt to answer, or apologise, or explain. If one’s book, or poem,
or picture survives, that is the best of all answers. If it does not
survive, well, one has had one’s say, thought one’s thought, done one’s
best to enlighten, to contribute, to console; and, like millions of other
human utterances, the sound is lost upon the wind, the thought, like a
rainbow radiance, has shone and vanished upon the cloud.

The book which is here presented has had its share both of good and evil
report; and it fell so far short of even its own simple purpose, that
I should be the last to hold that it had been blamed unduly. I have no
sort of intention of answering my critics; but I would wish to make plain
what the book itself perhaps fails to make plain, namely, what my purpose
in writing it was. The book grew rather than was made. It was, from the
first, meant as a message to the weak rather than as a challenge to the
strong. There is a theory of life, wielded like a cudgel by the hands of
the merry and high-hearted, that the whole duty of man is to dash into
the throng, to eat and drink, to love and wed, to laugh and fight. That
is a fine temper; it is the mood of the sailor-comrades of Odysseus—

    “That ever with a frolic welcome took
    The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed
    Free hearts, free foreheads.”

Such a mood, if it be not cruel, or tyrannous, or brutal, or overbearing,
is a generous and inspiriting thing. Joined, as I have seen it joined,
with simplicity and unselfishness and utter tenderness, it is the finest
spirit in the world—the spirit of the great and chivalrous knight of old
days. But when this mood shows itself without the kindly and gracious
knightly attributes, it is a vile and ugly thing, insolent, selfish,
animal.

The problem, then, which I tried to present in my book, was this: I
imagined a temperament of a peaceful and gentle order, a temperament
without robustness and _joie de vivre_, but with a sense of duty, a
desire to help, an anxious wish not to shirk responsibility; and then
I tried to depict such a character as being suddenly thrust into the
shadow, set aside, as, by their misfortune or their fault, a very large
number of persons are set aside, debarred from ambition, pushed into a
backwater of life, made, by some failure of vitality, into an invalid
(a word which conceals many of the saddest tragedies of the world)—and I
set myself to reflect how a man, with such limitations, might yet lead a
life that was wholesome and contented and helpful; and then, at the last,
I thought of him as confronted with a prospect of one of the deepest and
sweetest blessings of life, the hope of a noble love; and then again,
the tyrannous weakness that had laid him low, swept that too out of his
grasp, and bade him exchange death for life, darkness for the cheerful
day.

Who does not know of home after home where such things happen? of life
after life, on which calamities fall, so that the best that the sufferer
can do is _to gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost_?
This book, _The House of Quiet_, was written for all whose life, by
some stroke of God, seemed dashed into fragments, and who might feel so
listless, so dismayed, that they could not summon up courage even to try
and save something from the desolate wreck.

To compare small things with great, it was an attempt to depict, in
modern unromantic fashion, such a situation as that of _Robinson
Crusoe_, where a man is thrown suddenly upon his own resources, shut off
from sympathy and hope. In that great fiction one sees the patience, the
courage, the inventiveness of the simple hero grow under the author’s
hand; but the soul of my own poor hero had indeed suffered shipwreck,
though he fell among less stimulating surroundings than the caverns
and freshets, the wildfowl and the savages, of that green isle in the
Caribbean Sea.

In the _Life_ of William Morris, a man whose chosen motto was _si je
puis_, and who, whatever else he was accused of, was never accused of a
want of virile strength, there is an interesting and pathetic letter,
which he wrote at the age of fifty-one, when he was being thrust, against
his better judgment, into a prominent position in the Socialist movement.

“My habits are quiet and studious,” he said, “and, if I am too much
worried with ‘politics,’ _i.e._, intrigue, I shall be no use to the cause
as a writer. All this shows, you will say, a weak man: that is true, but
I must be taken as I am, not as I am not.”

This sentence sums up, very courageously and faithfully, the difficulty
in which many people, who believe in ideas, and perceive more clearly
than they are able to act, are placed by honest diffidence and candid
self-knowledge. We would amend life, if we could; but the impossibility
lies, not in seeing what is beautiful and just and right, but in making
other people desire it. It is conceivable, after all, that God knows
best, and has good reasons for delay—though many men, and those not the
least gallant, act as though they knew better still. But it matters very
little whether we betray our own weakness, by what we say or do. What
does matter is that we should have desired something ahead of us, should
have pointed it out to others. We may not attain it; others may not
attain it; but we have shown that we dare not acquiesce in our weakness,
that we will not allow ourselves to be silent about our purer hopes, that
we will not recline in a false security, that we will not try to solve
the problem by overlooking its difficulties; but that we will strive to
hold fast, in a tender serenity, to a belief in the strong and loving
purpose of God, however dark may be the shadow that lies across the path,
however sombre the mountain-barrier that lies between us and the sunlit
plain.



_The writer of the following pages was a distant cousin of my own, and
to a certain extent a friend. That is to say, I had stayed several times
with him, and he had more than once visited me at my own home. I knew
that he was obliged, for reasons of health, to live a very quiet and
retired life; but he was not a man who appeared to be an invalid. He
was keenly interested in books, in art, and above all in people, though
he had but few intimate friends. He died in the autumn of 1900, and his
mother, who was his only near relation, died in the following year; it
fell to me to administer his estate, and among his papers I found this
book, prepared in all essential respects for publication, though it is
clear that it would not have seen the light in his lifetime. I submitted
it to a friend of wide literary experience; his opinion was that the book
had considerable interest, and illustrated a definite and peculiar point
of view, besides presenting a certain attraction of style. I accordingly
made arrangements for its publication; adding a few passages from the
diary of the last days, which was composed subsequently to the date at
which the book was arranged._

_I need hardly say that the names are throughout fictitious; and I will
venture to express a hope that identification will not be attempted,
because the book is one which depends for its value, not on the material
circumstances of the writer, but upon the views of life which he formed._




THE HOUSE OF QUIET




INTRODUCTORY


                                                  _Christmas, Eve, 1898._

I have been a good deal indoors lately, and I have been amusing myself by
looking through old papers and diaries of my own. It seems to me that,
though the record is a very uneventful one, there is yet a certain unity
throughout—I can hardly call it a conscious, definite aim, or dignify it
by the name of a philosophy. But I have lived latterly with a purpose,
and on a plan that has gradually shaped itself and become more coherent.

It was formerly my ambition to write a book, and it has gone the way of
most ambitions. I suppose I have not the literary temperament; I have
not got the instinct for _form_ on a large scale. In the books which
I have attempted to write, I have generally lost myself among details
and abandoned the task in despair. I have never been capable of the
_fundamental brainwork_; the _fundamental conception_ which Rossetti
said made all the difference between a good piece of art and a bad one.
When I was young, my idea of writing was to pile fine phrases together,
and to think that any topic which occurred to my mind was pertinent to
the matter in hand. Now that I am older, I have learnt that form and
conception are not everything but nearly everything, and that a definite
idea austerely presented is better than a heap of literary ornament.

And now it seems to me that I have after all, without intending it,
written a book,—the one book, that, it is said, every man has in his
power to write. I feel like the King of France who said that he had
“discovered” a gallery in one of his palaces by the simple process of
pulling down partition walls. I have discarded a large amount of writing,
but I have selected certain episodes, made extracts from my diaries,
and added a few passages; and the result is the story of my life, told
perhaps in a desultory way, but with a certain coherence.

Whether or no the book will ever see the light I cannot tell; probably
not. I do not suppose I shall have the courage to publish it myself, and
I do not know any one who is likely to take the trouble of editing it
when I am gone. But there it is—the story of a simple life. Perhaps it
will go the way of waste paper, kindle fires, flit in sodden dreariness
about ashpits, till it is trodden in the mire. Perhaps it may repose
in some dusty bookshelf, and arouse the faint and tender curiosity of
some far-off inheritor of my worldly goods, like the old diaries of
my forefathers which stand on my own bookshelf. But if it came to be
published I think that there are some to whom it would appeal, as the
thin-drawn tremor of the violin stirs the note in vase or glass that have
stood voiceless and inanimate. I have borne griefs, humiliations, dark
overshadowings of the spirit; there are moments when I have peered, as it
were, into the dim-lit windows of hell; but I have had, too, my fragrant
hours, tranquil joys, imperishable ecstasies. And as a pilgrim may tell
his tale of travel to homekeeping folks, so I may allow myself the
license to speak, and tell what of good and evil the world has brought
me, and of my faint strivings after that interior peace, which can be
found, possessed, and enjoyed.




1


                                                          _Dec. 7, 1897._

[Sidenote: MY ROOM]

I sit this evening, towards the end of the year, in a deep arm-chair in
a large, low panelled room that serves me as bedroom and study together:
the windows are hung with faded tapestry curtains; there is a great
open tiled fireplace before me, with logs red-crumbling, bedded in grey
ash, every now and then winking out flame and lighting up the lean iron
dogs that support the fuel; odd Dutch tiles pave and wall the cavernous
hearth—this one a quaint galleon in full sail on a viscous, crested sea;
that, a stout sleek bird standing in complacent tranquillity; at the back
of the hearth, with the swift shadows flickering over it, is a large iron
panel showing a king in a war chariot, with a flying cloak, issuing from
an arched portal, upon a bridge which spans a furious stream, and shaking
out the reins of two stamping steeds; on the high chimney-board is a row
of Delft plates. The room is furnished with no precision or propriety,
the furniture having drifted in fortuitously as it was needed: here is a
tapestried couch; there an oak bookcase crammed with a strange assortment
of books; here a tall press; a picture or two—a bishop embedded in lawn
with a cauliflower wig; a crayon sketch of a scholarly head. There is
no plan of decoration—all fantastic miscellany. At the far end, under
an arch of oak, stands a bed, screened from the room by a dark leather
screen. Outside, all is unutterably still, not with the stillness that
sometimes falls on a sleeping town, where the hush seems invaded by
imperceptible cries, but with the deep tranquillity of the country-side
nestling down into itself. The trees are silent. Listening intently, I
can hear the trickle of the mill-leat, and the murmur of the hazel-hidden
stream; but that slumbrous sound ministers, as it were, the dreamful
quality, like the breathing of the sleeper—enough, and not more than
enough, to give the sense of sleeping life, as opposed to the aching, icy
stillness of death.




2


[Sidenote: EARLY DAYS]

I may speak shortly of my parentage and circumstances. I was the only
son of my father, a man who held a high administrative position under
Government. He owed his advancement not to family connections, for our
family though ancient was obscure. No doubt it may be urged that all
families are equally ancient, but what I mean is that our family had for
many generations preserved a sedulous tradition of gentle blood through
poverty and simple service. My ancestors had been mostly clergymen,
doctors, lawyers—at no time had we risen to the dignity of a landed
position or accumulated wealth: but we had portraits, miniatures,
plate—in no profusion, but enough to be able to feel that for a century
or two we had enjoyed a liberal education, and had had opportunities
for refinement if not leisure, and aptitude for cultivating the arts of
life; it had not been a mere sordid struggle, an inability to escape from
the coarsening pressure of gross anxieties, but something gracious,
self-contained, benevolent, active.

My father changed this; his profession brought him into contact with men
of rank and influence; he was fitted by nature to play a high social
part; he had an irresistible geniality, and something of a courtly air.
He married late, the daughter of an impoverished offshoot of a great
English family, and I was their only child.


When I was about six years old my father died suddenly, and the first
great shock of my life was the sight of the handsome waxen face, with the
blurred and flinty look of the dulled eyes, the leaden pallor of the thin
hands crossed on his breast; to this day I can see the blue shadows of
the ruffled shroud about his neck and wrists.

Our movements were simple enough. Only that summer, owing to an accession
of wealth, my father and mother had determined on some country home to
which they might retire in his months of freedom. My mother had never
cared for London; together they had found in the heart of the country a
house that attracted both of them, and a long lease had been taken within
a week or two of my father’s death. Our furniture was at once transferred
thither, and from that hour it has been my home.




3


[Sidenote: THE HOME LAND]

The region in which I live is a land of ridge and vale, as though it had
been ploughed with a gigantic plough. The high-roads lie as a rule along
the backs of the uplands, and the villages stand on the windy heights.
The lines of railway which run along the valley tend to create a new
species of valley village, but the old hamlets, with their grey-stone
high-backed churches, with slender shingled spires, stand aloft, the
pure air racing over them. The ancient manors and granges are as a rule
built in the more sheltered and sequestered valleys, approached from the
high-road by winding wood-lanes of exquisite beauty. The soil is sandy,
and a soft stone is quarried in many places by the road-side, leaving
quaint miniature cliffs and bluffs of weathered yellow, sometimes so
evenly stratified as to look like a rock-temple or a buried ruin with
mouldering buttresses; about these pits grow little knots of hazels and
ash-suckers, and the whole is hung in summer with luxuriant creepers and
climbing plants, out of which the crumbling rock-surfaces emerge. The
roads go down very steeply to the valleys, which are thick-set with copse
and woodland, and at the bottom runs a full-fed stream, with cascades and
pebbly shingles, running dark under scarps of sandstone, or hidden deep
under thick coverts of hazel, the water in the light a pure grey-green.
Some chalk is mingled with these ridges, so that in rainy weather the
hoof-prints in the roads ooze as with milk. The view from these uplands
is of exquisite beauty, ridge after ridge rolling its soft outlines,
thinly wooded. Far away are glimpses of high heathery tracts black with
pines, or a solitary clump upon some naked down. But the views in the
valleys are even more beautiful. The steep wood rises from the stream,
or the grave lines of some tilted fallow; in summer the water-plants
grow with rich luxuriance by the rivulet, tall willow-herb and velvety
loosestrife, tufted meadowsweet, and luxuriant comfrey. The homesteads
are of singular stateliness, with their great brick chimney-stacks, the
upper storeys weather-tiled and the roof of flat tiles of sandstone; the
whole mellowed by orange and grey lichens till the houses seem to have
sprung from the very soil.




4


[Sidenote: GOLDEN END]


5


[Sidenote: MY MOTHER]

My mother, who through the following pages must be understood to be the
presiding deity of the scene—_O quam te memorem?_—how shall I describe
her? Seen through her son’s eyes she has an extraordinary tranquillity
and graciousness of mien. She moves slowly with an absolutely unconscious
dignity. She is naturally very silent, and has a fixed belief that she
is entirely devoid of all intellectual power, which is in one sense
true, for she reads little and has no taste for discussion. At the same
time she is gifted with an extraordinary shrewdness and penetration in
practical matters, and I would trust her judgment without hesitation. She
is intensely affectionate, and has the largest heart I have ever known;
but at the same time is capable of taking almost whimsical prejudices
against people, which, however I have combated them at the time, have
generally proved to be justified by subsequent events. Her sympathy and
her geniality make her delightful company, for she delights in listening
to the talk of clever people and has a strong sense of humour. She likes
being read to, though I do not think she questions the thought of what is
read. She is deeply religious, though I do not suppose she could give a
reason for her faith, and is constantly tolerant of religious differences
which she never attempts to comprehend. In the village she is simply
adored by men, women, and children alike, though she is not particularly
given to what is called “visiting the poor.”

At the same time if there is trouble in any house, no matter of what
kind, she goes there straight by instinct, and has none of the dread of
emotional scenes which make so many of us cowards in the presence of
sorrow and suffering. I do not think she feels any duty about it, but it
is as natural and spontaneous for her to go as it is for most of us to
desire to keep away. A shrewd woman of the village, a labourer’s wife,
whom my mother had seen through a dreadful tragedy a year or two before,
once said in reply to a question of mine, “It isn’t as if her ladyship
said or did more than any one else—every one was kind to us—but she used
to come in and sit with me and look at me, and after a little I used to
feel that it was all right.”

She manages the household with less expenditure of trouble than I have
ever seen. Our servants never seem to leave us; they are paid what many
people would call absurdly high wages, but I do not think that is the
attraction. My mother does not see very much of them, and finds fault,
when rarely necessary, with a simple directness which I have in vain
tried to emulate; but her displeasure is so impersonal that there seems
to be no sting in it. It is not that they have failed in their duty to
herself, but they have been untrue to the larger duty to which she is
herself obedient.

She never seems to labour under any strong sense of the imperative duty
of philanthropic activity—indeed it is hard to say how her days are
filled—but in her simplicity, her unselfishness, her quiet acceptance
of the conditions of life, her tranquillity and her devoted lovingness
she seems to me the best Christian I have ever seen, and to come nearest
to the ideals of Christ. But, though a large part of her large income
is spent in unostentatious benevolence, she would think it preposterous
if it were suggested to her that Christianity demanded an absolute
sacrifice of worldly possessions. Yet she sets no store on comfort or
the evidences of wealth; she simply accepts them, and has a strong
instinctive feeling of stewardship.

I cannot help thinking that such women are becoming rarer; and yet it is
hard to believe that they can ever have been other than rare.



d the
sacred body; these were loose, and how I coveted them! In the case were
certain spikes and branches of crystal, the broken remains, I believe, of
a spreading crystal tree which once adorned the top. How far my memory
serves me I know not, but I am sure that the relic which may still
survive, is a most interesting thing; and I can recollect that when a
high dignitary of the Church stayed with us, it was kindly brought over
by the clergyman for his inspection, and his surprise was very great.

The Hall lay back from the common, sheltered by great trees. The
house itself, a low white building, was on those summer days cool
and fragrant. The feature of the place was the great fish-ponds—one
lay outside 
But the fault, if I may so phrase it, of this faith, is the vastness
of the conception to which it opens the mind. When I contemplate this
earth with its continents and islands, its mountains and plains, all
stored with histories of life and death, the bones of dead monsters, the
shattered hulks of time; the vast briny ocean with all the mysterious
life that stirs beneath the heaving crests; when I realise that even

[Sidenote: THE ARTIST]

Still, in other ways this period was most valuable—it made me practical
instead of fanciful; alert instead of dreamy; it made me feel what I had
never known before, the necessity for grasping the _exact_ point of a
matter, and not losing oneself among side issues. It helped me out of the
entirely amateurish condition of mind into which I had been drifting—and,
moreover, it taught me one thing which I had never realised, a lesson
for which I am profoundly grateful, namely that literature and art play
a very small part in the lives of the majority of people; that most men
have no sort of an idea that they are serious matters, but look upon
them as more or less graceful amusements; that in such regions they have
no power of criticism, and no judgment; but that these are not nearly
such serious defects as the defect of vision which the artist and the
man of letters suffer from and encourage—the defect, I mean, of treating
artistic ideals as matters of pre-eminent national, even of moral
importance. They must be content to range themselves frankly with other
craftsmen; they may sustain themselves by thinking that they may help, a
very little, to ameliorate conditions, to elevate the tone of morality
and thought, to provide sources of recreation, to strengthen the sense
of beauty; but they must remember that they cannot hope to belong to
the primal and elemental things of life. Not till the primal needs are
satisfied does the work of the poet and artist begin—“After the banquet,
the minstrel.”
did lower slopes[Sidenote: THE REWARD]ne of them drifted
to London, made a fortune, and, dying childless, left his money to the
head of the house, who bought more land, built a larger house, became
esquire, and eventually knight; his brass is in the church. They were
unimaginative folk, and whenever the country was divided, they generally
contrived to find themselves upon the prosaic and successful side.

[Sidenote: THE BISHOP]
[Sidenote: MR. CAMPDEN]

Mr. Campden has an infinite contempt for the gentlemen of the
neighbourhood, whom he treats with splendid courtesy, and the kind of
patronising amusement with which one listens to the prattle of a rustic
child. It is a matter of unceasing merriment to me to see him with a
young squire of the neighbourhood, an intelligent young fellow who has
travelled a good deal, and is a considerable reader. He has a certain
superficial shyness, and consequently has never been able to secure
enough of the talk for himself to show Mr. Campden what he is thinking
of; and Mr. Campden at once boards him with questions about the price
of eggs and the rotation of crops, calling him, “Will Honeycomb” from
the _Spectator_; and when plied with nervous questions as to Perugino or
Carlo Dolce, saying grandiloquently, “My dear young man, I know nothing
whatever about it; I leave that to the critics. I am a republican in art,
a red indeed, ha, ha! And you and I must not concern ourselves with such
things. Here we are in the country, and we must talk of _bullocks_. Tell
me now, in Lorton market last week, what price did a Tegg fetch?”

Mr. Campden is extraordinarily ignorant of all country matters, and
has a small stock of ancient provincial words, not indigenous to the
neighbourhood, but gathered from local histories, that he produces with
complacent pride. Indeed, I do not know that I ever saw a more ludicrous
scene than Mr. Campden talking agriculture to a distinguished scientific
man, whom a neighbouring squire had brought over to tea with him, and
whom he took for a landowner. To hear Mr. Campden explaining a subject
with which he was not acquainted to a courteous scientist, who did not
even know to what he was alluding, was a sight to make angels laugh.
[Sidenote: A DARK SECRET]

There is a place near Golden End where I encountered a singular
experience. I own that I never pass it now without some obsession
of feeling; indeed, I will confess that when I am alone I take a
considerable circuit to avoid the place. An ancient footway, trodden deep
in a sandy covert, winds up through a copse, and comes out into a quiet
place far from the high-road, in the heart of the wood. Here stands a
mouldering barn, and there are two or three shrubs, an escalonia and a
cypress, that testify to some remote human occupation. There is a stretch
of green sward, varied with bracken, and on the left a deep excavation,
where sand has been dug: in winter, a pool; in summer, a marshy place
full of stiff, lush water-plants. In this place, time after time as I
passed it, there seemed to be a strange silence. No bird seemed to sing
here, no woodland beast to frisk here; a secret shame or horror rested
on the spot. It was with no sense of surprise, but rather of resolved
doubt, that I found, one bright morning, two labouring men bent over
some object that lay upon the ground. When they saw me, they seemed at
first to hesitate, and then asked me to come and look. It was a spectacle
of singular horror: they had drawn from the marshy edge of the pool
the tiny skeleton of a child, wrapped in some oozy and ragged cloths;
the slime dripping from the eyeless cavities of the little skull, and
the weeds trailing over the unsightly cerements. It had caught the eye
of one of them as they were passing. “The place has always had an evil
name,” said one of them with a strange solemnity. There had been a house
there, I gathered, inhabited by a mysterious evil family, a place of
dark sin and hideous tradition. The stock had dwindled down to a wild
solitary woman, who extracted a bare sustenance out of a tiny farm, and
who alternated long periods of torpid gloom with disgusting orgies of
drunkenness. Thirty years ago she had died, and the farm had remained
so long unlet that it was at last pulled down, and the land planted
with wood. Subsequent investigations revealed nothing; and the body had
lain there, it was thought, for fully that time, preserved from decay
by an iron-bound box in which it had been enclosed, and of which some
traces still remained in reddish smears of rust and clotted nails. That
picture—the sunlit morning, the troubled faces of the men, the silent
spectatorial woods—has dwelt with me ineffaceably.

[Sidenote: OBSESSION]



24 lane.

[Sidenote: THE PEACEFUL MIND]

And what does the mind do in these tranquil hours? I hardly know.
The thought runs in a little leisurely stream, glancing from point to
point; the observation is, I notice, prematurely acute, and, though
the intellectual faculties are in abeyance, drinks in impressions with
greedy delight: the feathery, blue-green foliage of the ash-suckers, the
grotesque, geometrical forms in the lonely sandstone quarry, the curving
water-meadows with their tousled grasses, the stone-leek on the roof of
mellowed barns, the flash of white chalk-quarries carved out of distant
downs, the climbing, clustering roofs of the hamlet on the neighbouring
ridge.

Some would say that the mind in such hours grows dull, narrow, rustical,
and slow—“in the lonely vale of streams,” as Ossian sang, “abides the
narrow soul.” I hardly know, but I think it is the opposite: it is true
that one does not learn in such silent hours the deft trick of speech,
the easy flow of humorous thoughts, the tinkling interchange of the
mind; but there creeps over the spirit something of the coolness of
the pasture, the tranquillity of green copses, and the contentment of
the lazy stream. I think that, undiluted, such days might foster the
elementary brutishness of the spirit, and that just as rhododendrons
degenerate, if untended, to the primal magenta type, so one might revert
by slow degrees to the animal which lies not far below the civilised
surface. But there is no danger in my own life that I should have too
much of such reverie; indeed, I have to scheme a little for it; and it
is to me a bath of peace, a plunge into the quiet waters of nature, a
refreshing return to the untroubled and gentle spirit of the earth.
[Sidenote: THE CONVEYANCER]
In such light talk we beguiled the way; too soon we came to where our
roads divided; I pointed out to him the turn he was to take. “Well,” he
said cheerily, “all pleasant things come to an end. I confess that I
have enjoyed your company, and am grateful for your kind communications;
perhaps we may have another encounter, and if not, we will be glad to
have met, and think sometimes of this pleasant hour!” He put his foot
upon the step of his bicycle cautiously, then mounted gleefully, and
saying “Good-bye, good-bye!” he waved his hand, and in a moment was out
of sight.

The thought of this brave and merry spirit planning schemes of life,
making the most of simple pleasures, has always dwelt with me. The
gods, as we know from Homer, assumed the forms of men, and were at the
pains to relate long and wholly unreliable stories to account for their
presence at particular times and places; and I have sometimes wondered
whether in the lean conveyancer, with his childlike zest for experience,
his brisk enjoyment of the smallest details of daily life, I did not
entertain some genial, masquerading angel unawares.




26


                                                          _June 8, 1893._

Is it not the experience of every one that at rare intervals, by some
happy accident, life presents one with a sudden and delicious thrill of
beauty? I have often tried to analyse the constituent elements of these
moments, but the essence is subtle and defies detection. They cannot
be calculated upon, or produced by any amount of volition or previous
preparation. One thing about these tiny ecstasies I have noticed—they
do not come as a rule when one is tranquil, healthy, serene—they rather
come as a compensation for weariness and discontent; and yet they are the
purest gold of life, and a good deal of sand is well worth washing for a
pellet or two of the real metal.

To-day I was more than usually impatient; over me all the week had hung
the shadow of some trying, difficult business—the sort of business which,
whatever you do, will be done to nobody’s satisfaction. After a vain
attempt to wrestle with it, I gave it up, and went out on a bicycle;
the wind blew gently and steadily this soft June day; all the blue sky
was filled with large white clouds, blackening to rain. I made for the
one piece of flat ground in our neighbourhood. It is tranquillising, I
have often found, to the dweller in a hilly land, to cool and sober the
eye occasionally with the pure breadths of a level plain. The grass was
thick and heavy-headed in the fields, but of mere wantonness I turned
down a lane which I know has no ending,—a mere relief-road for carts to
have access to a farm,—and soon came to the end of it in a small grassy
circle, with a cottage or two, where a footpath strikes off across the
fields.

[Sidenote: HERETOFORE UNVISITED]

Why did I never come here before, I thought. Through a gap in the
hedge I saw a large broad pasture, fringed in the far distance with
full-foliaged, rotund elms in thick leaf; a row of willows on the horizon
marked the track of a stream. In the pasture in front of me was a broad
oblong pool of water with water-lilies; down one side ran a row of huge
horse-chestnuts, and the end was rich in elders full of flat white cakes
of blossom. In the field grazed an old horse; while a pigeon sailed
lazily down from the trees and ran to the pool to drink. That was all
there was to see. But it brought me with a deep and inexplicable thrill
close to the heart of the old, kindly, patient Earth, the mother and the
mistress and the servant of all—she who allows us to tear and rend her
for our own paltry ends, and then sets, how sweetly and tranquilly, to
work, with what a sense of inexhaustible leisure, to paint and mellow
and adorn the rude and bleeding gaps. We tear up a copse, and she fills
the ugly scars in the spring with a crop of fresh flowers—of flowers,
perhaps, which are not seen in the neighbourhood, but whose seeds have
lain vital and moist in the ground, but too deep to know the impulse
born of the spring sun. Yet now they burst their armoured mail, and send
a thin, white, worm-like arm to the top, which, as soon as it passes
into the light, drinks from the rays the green flush that it chooses to
hide its nakedness. We dig a pool in the crumbling marl. At the time the
wound seems irreparable; the ugly, slobbered banks grin at us like death;
the ground is full of footprints and slime, broken roots and bedabbled
leaves,—and next year it is all a paradise of green and luscious
water-plants, with a hundred quiet lives being lived there, of snail and
worm and beetle, as though the place had never been disturbed. We build
a raw red house with an insupportably geometrical outline, the hue of
the vicious fire still in the bricks; pass fifty years, and the bricks
are mellow and soft, plastered with orange rosettes or grey filaments of
lichen; the ugly window frames are blistered and warped; the roof has
taken a soft and yielding outline—all is in peace and harmony with the
green world in which it sits.

[Sidenote: THE REPAIRER OF THE BREACH]

I never saw this more beautifully illustrated than once, when a great
house in Whitehall was destroyed, and heaped up in a hideous rockery of
bricks. All through the winter these raw ruins, partly concealed by a
rough hoarding, tainted the view; but as soon as spring returned, from
every inch of grit rose a forest of green stalks of willow-herb, each in
summer to be crowned with a spire of fantastic crimson flowers, and to
pass a little later into those graceful, ghostly husks that shiver in
the wind. Centuries must have passed since willow-herb had grown on that
spot. Had they laid dormant, these hopeful seeds, or had they been wafted
along dusty streets and high in air over sun-scorched spaces? Nature at
all events had seen her chance, and done her work patiently and wisely
as ever.

But to return to my lane-end. How strange and deep are the impressions
of a deep and inviolate peace that some quiet corner like this gives to
the restless spirit! It can never be so with the scenes that have grown
familiar, where we have carried about with us the burden of private
cares—the symptoms of the disease of life. In any house where we have
lived, every corner, however peaceful and beautiful in itself, is bound
to be gradually soaked, as it were, in the miseries of life, to conceal
its beauties under the accretion of sordid associations.

This room we connect with some sad misunderstanding. There we gave way to
some petty passion of resentment, of jealousy, of irritation, or vainly
tried to pacify some similar outbreak from one we loved. This is the
torture of imagination; to feel the beauty of sight and sound, we must be
sensitive; and if we are sensitive, we carry about the shadow with us—the
capacity for self-torment, the struggle of the ideal with the passing
mood.

[Sidenote: SAD ASSOCIATIONS]

I have sometimes climbed to the top of a hill and looked into some
unknown and placid valley, with field and wood and rivulet and the homes
of men. I have seen the figures of men and oxen move sedately about
those quiet fields. Often, too, gliding at evening in a train through a
pastoral country when the setting sun bathes all things in genial light
and contented shade, I have felt the same thought. “How peaceful, how
simple life would be, nay, must be, here.” Only very gradually, as life
goes on, does it dawn upon the soul that the trouble lies deeper, and
that though surrounded by the most unimagined peace, the same fret, the
same beating of restless wings, the same delays attend. That dreamt-of
peace can hardly be attained. The most we can do is to enjoy it to the
utmost when it is with us; and when it takes its flight, and leaves us
dumb, discontented, peevish, to quench the sordid thought in resolute
_silence_, to curb the grating mood, to battle mutely with the cowering
fear; and so to escape investing the house and the garden that we love
with the poisonous and bitter associations that strike the beauty out of
the fairest scene.




27


                                                    _September 20, 1894._

I had to-day a strange little instance of the patient, immutable habit of
nature. Some years ago there was a particular walk of which I was fond;
it led through pastures, by shady wood-ends, and came out eventually on a
bridge that spanned the line. Here I often went to see a certain express
pass; there was something thrilling in the silent cutting, the beckoning,
ghostly arm of the high signal, the faint far-off murmur, and then the
roar of the great train forging past. It was a breath from the world.

[Sidenote: THE RED SPIDER]

On the parapet of the bridge, grey with close-grained lichen, there
lived a numerous colony of little crimson spiders. What they did I
never could discern; they wandered aimlessly about hither and thither,
in a sort of feeble, blind haste; if they ever encountered each other
on their rambles, they stopped, twiddled horns, and fled in a sudden
horror; they never seemed to eat or sleep, and even continued their
endless peregrinations in the middle of heavy showers, which flicked them
quivering to death.

I used to amuse myself with thinking how one had but to alter the scale,
so to speak, and what appalling, intolerable monsters these would become.
Think of it! huge crimson shapeless masses, with strong wiry legs, and
waving mandibles, tramping silently over the grey veldt, and perhaps
preying on minute luckless insects, which would flee before them in vain.

One day I walked on ahead, leaving a companion to follow. He did follow,
and joined me on the bridge—bringing heavy tidings which had just arrived
after I left home.

The place grew to me so inseparably connected with the horror of the news
that I instinctively abandoned it; but to-day, finding myself close to
the place—nearly ten years had passed without my visiting it—I turned
aside, musing on the old sadness, with something in my heart of the soft
regret that a sorrow wears when seen through the haze of years.

There was the place, just the same; I bent to see a passing train and (I
had forgotten all about them) there were my red spiders still pursuing
their aimless perambulations. But who can tell the dynasties, the
genealogies that had bridged the interval?

The red spider has no great use in the world, as far as I know. But he
has every right to be there, and to enjoy the sun falling so warm on the
stone. I wonder what he thinks about it all? For me, he has become the
type of the patient, pretty fancies of nature, so persistently pursued,
so void of moral, so deliciously fantastic and useless—but after all,
what am I to talk of usefulness?

Spider and man, man and spider—and to the pitying, tender mind of God,
the brisk spider on his ledge, and the dull, wistful, middle-aged man who
loiters looking about him, wondering and waiting, are much the same. He
has a careful thought of each, I know:—

    To both alike the darkness and the day,
      The sunshine and the flowers,
    We draw sad comfort, thinking we obey
      A deeper will than ours.




28


                                                        _August 4, 1895._

[Sidenote: THE DAWN]

Just another picture lingers with me, for no very defined reason. It was
an August night; I had gone to rest with the wind sighing and buffeting
against my windows, but when I awoke with a start, deep in the night,
roused, it seemed, as by footsteps in the air and a sudden hollow
calling of airy voices, it was utterly still outside. I drew aside my
heavy tapestry curtain, and lo! it was the dawn. A faint upward gush of
lemon-coloured light edged the eastern hills. The air as I threw the
casement wide was unutterably sweet and cool. In the faint light, over
the roof of the great barn, I saw what I had seen a hundred times before,
a quiet wood-end, upon which the climbing hedges converge. But now it
seemed to lie there in a pure and silent dream, sleeping a light sleep,
waiting contentedly for the dawn and smiling softly to itself. Over the
fields lay little wreaths of mist, and beyond the wood, hills of faintest
blue, the hills of dreamland, where it seems as if no harsh wind could
blow or cold rain fall. I felt as though I stood to watch the stainless
slumber of one I loved, and was permitted by some happy and holy chance
to see for once the unuttered peace that earth enjoys in her lonely and
unwatched hours. Too often, alas! one carries into the fairest scenes a
turmoil of spirit, a clouded mind that breaks and mars the spell. But
here it was not so; I gazed upon the hushed eyes of the earth, and heard
her sleeping breath; and, as the height of blessing, I seemed myself
to have left for a moment the past behind, to have no overshadowing
from the future, but to live only in the inviolate moment, clear-eyed
and clean-hearted, to see the earth in her holiest and most secluded
sanctuary, unsuspicious and untroubled, bathed in the light and careless
slumber of eternal youth, in that delicious oblivion that fences day from
weary day.

In the jaded morning light the glory was faded, and the little wood wore
its usual workaday look, the face it bears before the world; but I, I
had seen it in its golden dreams; I knew its secret, and it could not
deceive me; it had yielded to me unawares its sublimest confidence, and
however it might masquerade as a commonplace wood, a covert for game, a
commercial item in an estate-book, known by some homely name, I had seen
it once undisguised, and knew it as one of the porches of heaven.




29


                                                         _April 4, 1896._

It seems a futile task to say anything about the spring; yet poets and
romancers make no apologies for treating of love, which is an old and
familiar phenomenon enough. And I declare that the wonder of spring,
so far from growing familiar, strikes upon the mind with a bewildering
strangeness, a rapturous surprise, which is greater every year. Every
spring I say to myself that I never realised before what a miraculous,
what an astounding thing is the sudden conspiracy of trees and flowers,
hatched so insensibly, and carried out so punctually, to leap into life
and loveliness together. The velvety softness of the grass, the mist
of green that hangs about the copse, the swift weaving of the climbing
tapestry that screens the hedgerow-banks, the jewellery of flowers that
sparkle out of all sequestered places; they are adorable. But this early
day of spring is close and heavy, with a slow rain dropping reluctantly
out of the sky, a day when an insidious melancholy lies in wait for
human beings, a sense of inadequacy, a meek rebellion against all
activity, bodily or mental. I walk slowly and sedately along the sandy
roads fast oozing into mire. There is a sense of expectancy in the air;
tree and flower are dispirited too, oppressed with heaviness, and yet
gratefully conscious, as I am not, of the divine storage of that pure and
subtle element that is taking place for their benefit. “Praise God,” said
Saint Francis, “for our sister the water, for she is very serviceable to
us and humble and clean.” Yes, we give thanks! but, alas! to sit still
and be pumped into, as Carlyle said of Coleridge’s conversation, can
never be an enlivening process.

Yet would that the soul could gratefully recognise her own rainy days;
could droop, like Nature, with patient acquiescence, with wise passivity,
till the wells of strength and freshness are stored!

[Sidenote: SUBTLE SUPERIORITIES]

The particular form of melancholy which I find besets me on these sad
reflective mornings, is to compare my vague ambitions with my concrete
performances. I will not say that in my dreamful youth I cherished the
idea of swaying the world. I never expected to play a brave part on
the public stage. Political and military life—the two careers which
ripple communities to the verge, never came within the range of my
possibilities. But I think that I was conscious—as most intelligent young
creatures undoubtedly are—of a subtle superiority to other people. An
ingenious preacher once said that we cannot easily delude ourselves into
the belief that we are richer, taller, more handsome, or even wiser,
better, abler, and more capable than other people, but we can and do
very easily nourish a secret belief that we are more _interesting_ than
others. Such an illusion has a marvellous vitality; it has a delicate
power of resisting the rude lessons to the contrary which contact with
the world would teach us; and I should hardly like to confess how ill I
have learned my lesson. I realise, of course, that I have done little to
establish this superiority in the eyes of others; but I find it hard to
disabuse myself of the vague belief that if only I had the art of more
popular and definite expression, if only the world had a little more
leisure to look in sequestered nooks for delicate flowers of thought and
temperament, then it might be realized how exquisite a nature is here
neglected.

[Sidenote: THE HARD TRUTH]

In saying this I am admitting the reader to the inmost _penetralia_ of
thought. I frankly confess that in my robust and equable moments I do
recognise the broken edge of my life, and what a very poor thing I have
made of it—but, for all that, it is my honest belief that we most of us
have in our hearts that inmost shrine of egotism, where the fire burns
clear and fragrant before an idealised image of self; and I go further,
and say that I believe this to be a wholesome and valuable thing, because
it is of the essence of self-respect, and gives us a feeble impulse
in the direction of virtue and faith. If a man ever came to realise
exactly his place in the world, as others realise it, how feeble, how
uninteresting, how ludicrously unnecessary he is, and with what a
speedy unconcern others would accommodate themselves to his immediate
disappearance, he would sink into an abyss of gloom out of which nothing
would lift him. It is one of the divine uses of love, that it glorifies
life by restoring and raising one’s self-esteem.

In the dejected reveries of such languorous spring days as these, no such
robust egotism as I have above represented comes to my aid. I see myself
stealing along, a shy, tarnished thing, a blot among the fresh hopes and
tender dreams that smile on every bank. The pitiful fabric of my life
is mercilessly unveiled; here I loiter, a lonely, shabby man, bruised
by contact with the word, dilatory, dumb, timid, registering tea-table
triumphs, local complacencies, provincial superiorities—spending
sheltered days in such comfortable dreams as are born of warm fires,
ample meals, soft easy-chairs, and congratulating myself on poetical
potentialities, without any awkward necessities of translating my dreams
into corrective action—or else discharging homely duties with an almost
sacerdotal solemnity, and dignifying with the title of religious quietism
what is done by hundreds of people instinctively and simply and without
pretentiousness. If I raved against my limitations, deemed my cage a
prison, beat myself sick against the bars, I might then claim to be a
fiery and ardent soul; but I cannot honestly do this; and I must comfort
myself with the thought that possibly the ill-health, which necessitates
my retirement, compensates for the disabilities it inflicts on me, by
removing the stimulus which would make my prison insupportable.

In this agreeable frame of mind I drew near home and stood awhile on
the deserted bowling-green with its elder-thickets, its little grassy
terraces, its air of regretful wildness, so often worn by a place that
has been tamed by civilisation and has not quite reverted to its native
savagery. A thrush sang with incredible clearness, repeating a luscious
phrase often enough to establish its precision of form, and yet not often
enough to satiate—a triumph of instinctive art.

These thrushes are great favourites of mine; I often sit, on a dewy
morning, to watch them hunting. They hop lightly along, till they espy a
worm lying in blissful luxury out of his hole; two long hops, and they
are upon him; he, using all his retractile might, clings to his home, but
the thrush sets his feet firm in the broad stride of the Greek warrior,
gives a mighty tug—you can see the viscous elastic thread strain—and
the worm is stretched writhing on the grass. What are the dim dreams of
the poor reptile, I wonder; does he regret his cool burrow, “and youth
and strength and this delightful world?”—no, I think it is a stoical
resignation. For a moment the thrush takes no notice of him, but surveys
the horizon with a caution which the excitement of the chase has for
an instant imprudently diverted. Then the meal begins, with horrid
leisureliness.

But it is strange to note the perpetual instinctive consciousness
of danger which besets birds thus in the open; they must live in a
tension of nervous watchfulness which would depress a human being into
melancholia. There is no absorbed gobbling; between every mouthful the
little head with its beady eyes swings right and left to see that all is
clear; and he is for ever changing his position and seldom fronts the
same way for two seconds together.

Do we realise what it must be to live, as even these sheltered birds do
in a quiet garden, with the fear of attack and death hanging over them
from morning to night?

[Sidenote: THE BONDAGE OF A BIRD]

Another fact that these thrushes have taught me is the extreme narrowness
of their self-chosen world. They are born and live within the compass
of a few yards. We are apt to envy a bird the power of changing his
horizon, of soaring above the world, and choosing for his home the
one spot he desires. Think what our life would be if, without luggage,
without encumbrances, we could rise in the air and, winging our way out
to the horizon, choose some sequestered valley, and there, without house,
without rates and taxes, abide, with water babbling in its channel and
food abundant. Yet it is far otherwise. One of my thrushes has a white
feather in his wing; he was hatched out in a big syringa which stands
above the bowling-green; and though I have observed the birds all about
my few acres carefully enough I have never seen this particular thrush
anywhere but on the lawn. He never seems even to cross the wall into
the garden; he has a favourite bush to roost in, and another where he
sometimes sings: at times he beats along the privet hedge, or in the
broad border, but he generally hops about the lawn, and I do not think he
has ever ventured beyond it. He works hard for his living too; he is up
at dawn, and till early afternoon he is generally engaged in foraging. He
will die, I suppose, in the garden, though how his body is disposed of is
a mystery to me.

[Sidenote: THE SOUL OF A THRUSH]

He takes the limitations of his life just as he finds them; he never
seems to think he would like to be otherwise; but he works diligently
for his living, he sings a grateful song, he sleeps well, he does not
compare himself with other birds or wish his lot was different—he has no
regrets, no hopes, and few cares. Still less has he any philanthropic
designs of raising the tone of his brother thrushes, or directing a
mission among the quarrelsome sparrows. Sometimes he fights a round or
two, and when the spring comes, stirred by delicious longings, he will
build a nest, devote the food he would like to devour to his beady-eyed,
yellow-lipped young, and die as he has lived. There is a good deal to be
said for this brave and honest life, and especially for the bright and
wholesome music which he makes within the thickets. I do not know that it
can be improved upon.




30


                                                         _Aug. 19, 1898._

[Sidenote: GOD’S ACRE]

There is a simple form of expedition of which I am very fond; that is the
leisurely visiting of some rustic church in the neighbourhood. They are
often very beautifully placed—sometimes they stand high on the ridges
and bear a bold testimony to the faith; sometimes they lie nestled in
trees, hidden in valleys, as if to show it is possible to be holy and
beautiful, though unseen. Sometimes they are the central ornament of a
village street; there generally seems some simple and tender reason for
their position; but the more populous their neighbourhood, the more they
have suffered from the zeal of the restorer. What I love best of all is a
church that stands a little apart, sheltered in wood, dreaming by itself,
and guarding its tranquil and grateful secret—“_secretum meum mihi_,” it
seems to say.

I like to loiter in the churchyard ground to step over the hillocks, to
read the artless epitaphs on slanting tombs; it is not a morbid taste,
for if there is one feeling more than another that such a visit removes
and tranquillises, it is the fear of death. Death here appears in its
most peaceful light; it seems so necessary, so common, so quiet and
inevitable an end, like a haven after a troubled sea. Here all the sad
and unhappy incidents of mortality are forgotten, and death appears only
in the light of a tender and dreamful sleep.

Better still is the grateful coolness of the church itself; here one can
trace in the epitaphs the fortunes of a family—one can see the graves
of old squires who have walked over their own fields, talked with their
neighbours, shot, hunted, eaten, drunk, have loved and been loved, and
have yielded their place in the fulness of days to those that have come
after them. Very moving, too, are the evidences of the sincere grief,
which underlies the pompous phraseology of the marble monument with
its urns and cherubs. I love to read the long list of homely virtues
attributed by the living to the dead in the depth of sorrow, and to
believe them true. Then there are records of untimely deaths,—the young
wife, the soldier in his prime, the boy or girl who have died unstained
by life, and about whom clings the passionate remembrance of the happy
days that are no more. Such records as those do not preach the lesson
of vanity and decay, but the lesson of pure and grateful resignation,
the faith that the God who made the world so beautiful, and filled it so
full of happiness, has surprises in store for His children, in a world
undreamed of.

[Sidenote: THE MONUMENT]

One monument in a church not far from Golden End always brings tears to
my eyes; there is a chapel in the aisle, the mausoleum of an ancient
family, where mouldering banners and pennons hang in the gloom; in the
centre of the chapel is an altar-tomb, on which lies the figure of a
young boy, thirteen years old, the inscription says. He reclines on one
arm, he has a delicately carved linen shirt that leaves the slender neck
free, and he is wrapped in a loose gown; he looks upward toward the east,
his long hair falling over his shoulders, his thin and shapely hand
upon his knee. On each side of the tomb, kneeling on marble cushions on
the ledge, are his father and mother, an earl and countess. The mother,
in the stately costume of a bygone court, with hair carefully draped,
watches the face of the child with a look in which love seems to have
cast out grief. The earl in armour, a strongly-built, soldier-like
figure, looks across the boy’s knee at his wife’s face, but in his
expression—I know not if it be art—there seems to be a look of rebellious
sorrow, of thwarted pride. All his wealth and state could not keep his
darling with him, and he does not seem to understand. There have they
knelt, the little group, for over two centuries, waiting and watching,
and one is glad to think that they know now whatever there is to know.
Outside the golden afternoon slants across the headstones, and the birds
twitter in the ivy, while a full stream winds below through the meadows
that once were theirs.

Such a contemplation does not withdraw one from life or tend to give a
false view of its energies; it does not forbid one to act, to love, to
live; it only gilds with a solemn radiance the cloud that overshadows us
all, the darkness of the inevitable end. Face to face with the _lacrimæ
rerum_ in so simple and tender a form, the heavy words _Memento Mori_
fall upon the heart not as a sad and harsh interruption of wordly dreams
and fancies, but as a deep pedal note upon a sweet organ, giving
strength and fulness and balance to the dying away of the last grave and
gentle chord.




31


If any one whose eye may fall upon these pages be absolutely equable
of temperament, serene, contented, the same one day as another, as Dr.
Johnson said of Reynolds, let him not read this chapter—he will think it
a mere cry in the dark, better smothered in the bed-clothes, an unmanly
piece of morbid pathology, a secret and sordid disease better undivulged,
on which all persons of proper pride should hold their peace.

Well, it is not for him that I write; there are books and books, and
even chapters and chapters, just as there are people and people. I
myself avoid books dealing with health and disease. I used when younger
to be unable to resist the temptation of a medical book; but now I am
wiser, and if I sometimes yield to the temptation, it is with a backward
glancing eye and a cautious step. And I will say that I generally put
back the book with a snap, in a moment, as though a snake had stung me.
But there will be no pathology here—nothing but a patient effort to look
a failing in the face, and to suggest a remedy.

[Sidenote: FEARS]

I speak to the initiated, to those who have gone down into the dark
cave, and seen the fire burn low in the shrine, and watched aghast
the formless, mouldering things—hideous implements are they, or mere
weapons?—that hang upon the walls.

Do you know what it is to dwell, perhaps for days together, under the
shadow of a fear? Perhaps a definite fear—a fear of poverty, or a fear
of obloquy, or a fear of harshness, or a fear of pain, or a fear of
disease—or, worse than all, a boding, misshapen, sullen dread which has
no definite cause, and is therefore the harder to resist.

[Sidenote: DREAMS]

These moods, I say it with gratitude for myself and for the encouragement
of others, tend to diminish in acuteness and in frequency as I grow
older. They are now, as ever, preluded by dreams of a singular kind,
dreams of rapid and confused action, dreams of a romantic and exaggerated
pictorial character—huge mountain ranges, lofty and venerable buildings,
landscapes of incredible beauty, gardens of unimaginable luxuriance,
which pass with incredible rapidity before the mind. I will indicate
two of these in detail. I was in a vessel like a yacht, armed with a
massive steel prow like a ram, which moved in some aerial fashion over
a landscape, skimming it seemed to me but a few feet above the ground.
A tall man of benignant aspect stood upon the bridge, and directed the
operations of the unseen navigator. We ascended a heathery valley, and
presently encountered snow-drifts, upon which the vessel seemed to settle
down to her full speed; at last we entered a prodigious snowfield, with
vast ridged snow-waves extending in every direction for miles; the vessel
ran not over but through these waves, sending up huge spouts of snow
which fell in cool showers upon my head and hands, while the tinkle of
dry ice fragments made a perpetual low music. At last we stopped and I
descended on to the plateau. Far ahead, through rolling clouds, I saw the
black snow-crowned heights of a mountain, loftier than any seen by human
eye, and for leagues round me lay the interminable waste of snow. I was
aroused from my absorption by a voice behind me; the vessel started again
on her course with a leap like a porpoise, and though I screamed aloud
to stop her, I saw her, in a few seconds, many yards ahead, describing
great curves as she ran, with the snow spouting over her like a fountain.

The second was a very different scene. I was in the vine-clad alleys
of some Italian garden; against the still blue air a single stone pine
defined itself; I walked along a path, and turning a corner an exquisite
conventual building of immense size, built of a light brown stone,
revealed itself. From all the alleys round emerged troops of monastic
figures in soft white gowns, and a mellow chime of exceeding sweetness
floated from the building. I saw that I too was robed like the rest; but
the gliding figures outstripped me; and arriving last at a great iron
portal I found it closed, and the strains of a great organ came drowsily
from within.

Then into the dream falls a sudden sense of despair like an ashen
cloud; a feeling of incredible agony, intensified by the beauty of the
surrounding scene, that agony which feverishly questions as to why so
dark a stroke should fall when the mind seems at peace with itself
and lost in dreamy wonder at the loveliness all about it. Then the
vision closes, and for a time the mind battles with dark waves of
anguish, emerging at last, like a diver from a dim sea, into the waking
consciousness. The sickly daylight filters through the window curtains
and the familiar room swims into sight. The first thought is one of
unutterable relief, which is struck instantly out of the mind by the
pounce of the troubled mood; and then follows a ghastly hour, when every
possibility of horror and woe intangible presses in upon the battling
mind. At such moments a definite difficulty, a practical problem would
be welcome—but there is none; the misery is too deep for thought, and
even, when after long wrestling, the knowledge comes that it is all a
subjective condition, and that there is no adequate cause in life or
circumstances for this unmanning terror—even then it can only be silently
endured, like the racking of some fierce physical pain.

[Sidenote: WOE]

The day that succeeds to such a waking mood is almost the worst part
of the experience. Shaken and dizzied by the inrush of woe, the mind
straggles wearily through hour after hour; the familiar duties are
intolerable; food has no savour; action and thought no interest; and if
for an hour the tired head is diverted by some passing event, or if,
oppressed with utter exhaustion, it sinks into an unrefreshing slumber,
repose but gives the strength to suffer—the accursed mood leaps again, as
from an unseen lair, upon the unnerved consciousness, and tears like some
strange beast the helpless and palpitating soul.

When first, at Cambridge, I had the woeful experiences above recorded,
I was so unused to endurance, so bewildered by suffering, that I think
for awhile I was almost beside myself. I recollect going down with some
friends, in a brief lull of misery, to watch a football match, when the
horror seized me in the middle of a cheerful talk with such vehemence,
that I could only rush off with a muttered word, and return to my rooms,
in which I immured myself to spend an hour in an agony of prayer. Again
I recollect sitting with some of the friends of my own age after hall;
we were smoking and talking peacefully enough—for some days my torment
had been suspended—when all at once, out of the secret darkness the
terror leapt upon me, and after in vain resisting it for a few moments,
I hurried away, having just enough self-respect to glance at my watch
and mutter something about a forgotten engagement. But worst of all was
a walk taken with my closest friend on a murky November day. We started
in good spirits, when in a moment the accursed foe was upon me; I hardly
spoke except for fitful questions. Our way led us to a level crossing,
beside a belt of woodland, where a huge luggage train was jolting and
bumping backwards and forewards. We hung upon the gate; and then, and
then only, came upon me in a flash an almost irresistible temptation to
lay my head beneath the ponderous wheels, and end it all; I could only
pray in silence, and hurry from the spot in speechless agitation. What
wonder if I heard on the following day that my friend complained that I
was altering for the worse—that I had become so sullen and morose that it
was no use talking to me.

Gradually, very gradually, the aching frost of the soul broke up and
thawed; little trifling encouraging incidents—a small success or two,
an article accepted by a magazine, a friendship, an athletic victory,
raised me step by step out of the gloom. One benefit, even at the time,
it brought me—an acute sensitiveness to beauty both of sight and sound.
I used to steal at even-song into the dark nave of King’s Chapel, and
the sight of the screen, the flood of subdued light overflowing from the
choir, the carven angels with their gilded trumpets, penetrated into the
soul with an exquisite sweetness; and still more the music—whether the
low prelude with the whispering pedals, the severe monotone breaking
into freshets of harmony, the swing and richness of the chants, or the
elaborate beauty of some familiar magnificat or anthem—all fell like
showers upon the arid sense. The music at King’s had one characteristic
that I have never heard elsewhere; the properties of the building are
such that the echo lingers without blurring the successive chords—not
“loth to die,” I used to think, as Wordsworth says, but sinking as it
were from consciousness to dream, and from dream to death.

[Sidenote: THE BROTHERHOOD OF SORROW]

One further gain—the greater—was that my suffering did not, I think,
withdraw me wholly into myself and fence me from the world; rather it
gave me a sense of the brotherhood of grief. I was one with all the
agonies that lie silent in the shadow of life; and though my suffering
had no tangible cause, yet I was initiated into the fellowship of those
who _bear_. I _understood_;—weak, faithless, and faulty as I was, I was
no longer in the complacent isolation of the strong, the successful, the
selfish, and even in my darkest hour I had strength to thank God for
that.




32


                                                         _Oct. 21, 1898._

I have been reading some of my old diaries to-day; and I am tempted to
try and disentangle, as far as I can, the _motif_ that seems to me to
underlie my simple life.

One question above all others has constantly recurred to my mind; and the
answer to it is the sum of my slender philosophy.

The question then is this: is a simple, useful, dignified, happy life
possible to most of us without the stimulus of affairs, of power, of
fame? I answer unhesitatingly that such a life is possible. The tendency
of the age is to measure success by publicity, not to think highly of
any person or any work unless it receives “recognition,” to think it
essential to happiness _monstrari digito_, to be in the swim, to be a
personage.

I admit at once the temptation; to such successful persons comes the
consciousness of influence, the feeling of power, the anxious civilities
of the undistinguished, the radiance of self-respect, the atmosphere
of flattering, subtle deference, the seduction of which not even the
most independent and noble characters can escape. Indeed, many an
influential man of simple character and unpretending virtue, who rates
such conveniences of life at their true value, and does not pursue them
as an end, would be disagreeably conscious of the lack of these _petits
soins_ if he adopted an unpopular cause or for any reason forfeited the
influence which begets them.

A friend of mine came to see me the other day fresh from a visit to a
great house. His host was a man of high cabinet rank, the inheritor of
an ample fortune and a historic name, who has been held by his nearest
friends to cling to political life longer than prudence would warrant.
My friend told me that he had been left alone one evening with his host,
who had, half humorously, half seriously, indulged in a lengthy tirade
against the pressure of social duties and unproductive drudgery that his
high position involved. “If they would only let me alone!” he said; “I
think it very hard that in the evening of my days I cannot order my life
to suit my tastes. I have served the public long enough.... I would
read—how I would read—and when I was bored I would sleep in my chair.”

[Sidenote: SUCCESS]

“And yet,” my friend said, commenting on these unguarded statements, “I
believe he is the only person of his intimate circle who does not know
that he would be hopelessly bored—that the things he decries are the very
breath of life to him. There is absolutely no reason why he should not at
once and forever realise his fancied ideal—and if his wife and children
do not urge him to do so, it is only because they know that he would be
absolutely miserable.” And this is true of many lives.

If the “recognition,” of which I have spoken above, were only accorded
to the really eminent, it would be a somewhat different matter; but
nine-tenths of the persons who receive it are nothing more than phantoms,
who have set themselves to pursue the glory, without the services that
ought to earn it. A great many people have a strong taste for power
without work, for dignity without responsibility; and it is quite
possible to attain consideration if you set yourself resolutely to pursue
it.

The temptation comes in a yet more subtle form to men of a really
high-minded type, whose chief preoccupation is earnest work and the
secluded pursuit of some high ideal. Such people, though they do not
wish to fetter themselves with the empty social duties that assail the
eminent, yet are tempted to wish to have the refusal of them, and to be
secretly dissatisfied if they do not receive this testimonial to the
value of their work. The temptation is not so vulgar as it seems. Every
one who is ambitious wishes to be effective. A man does not write books
or paint pictures or make speeches simply to amuse himself, to fill his
time; and they are few who can genuinely write, as the late Mark Pattison
wrote of a period of his life, that his ideal was at one time “defiled
and polluted by literary ambition.”

Nevertheless, if there is to be any real attempt to win the inner peace
of the spirit, such ambition must be not sternly but serenely resisted.
Not until a man can pass by the rewards of fame _oculis irretortis_—“nor
cast one longing, lingering look behind”—is the victory won.

[Sidenote: PURE AMBITION]

It may be urged, in my case, that the obscurity for which I crave was
never likely to be denied me. True; but at the same time ambition in its
pettiest and most childish forms has been and is a real temptation to
me: the ambition to dominate and dazzle my immediate circle, to stimulate
curiosity about myself, to be considered, if not a successful man, at
least a man who might have succeeded if he had cared to try—all the
temptations which are depicted in so masterly and merciless a way by that
acute psychologist Mr. Henry James in the character of Gilbert Osmond in
the _Portrait of a Lady_—to all of these I plead guilty. Had I not been
gifted with sufficient sensitiveness to see how singularly offensive and
pitiful such pretences are in the case of others, I doubt if I should not
have succumbed—if indeed I have not somewhat succumbed—to them.

Indeed, to some morbid natures such pretences are vital—nay, self-respect
would be impossible without them. I know a lady who, like Mrs.
Wittiterly, is really kept alive by the excitement of being an invalid.
If she had not been so ill she would have died years ago. I know a worthy
gentleman who lives in London and spends his time in hurrying from house
to house lamenting how little time he can get to do what he really
enjoys—to read or think. Another has come to my mind who lives in a
charming house in the country, and by dint of inviting a few second-rate
literary and artistic people to his house and entertaining them royally,
believes himself to be at the very centre of literary and artistic life,
and essential to its continuance. These are harmless lives, not unhappy,
not useless; based, it is true, upon a false conception of the relative
importance of their own existence, but then is there one of us—the most
hard-working, influential, useful person in the world—who does not
exaggerate his own importance? Does any one realise how little essential
he is, or how easily his post is filled—indeed, how many people there are
who believe that they could do the same thing better if they only had the
chance.

A life to be happy must be compounded in due degree of activity and
pleasure, using the word in its best sense. There must be sufficient
activity to take off the perilous and acrid humours of the mind which,
left to themselves, poison the sources of life, and enough pleasure to
make the prospect of life palatable.

The first necessity is to get rid, as life goes on, of all conventional
pleasures. By the age of forty a man should know what he enjoys, and
not continue doing things intended to be pleasurable, either because he
deludes himself into thinking that he enjoys them, or because he likes
others to think that he enjoys them. I know now that I do not care for
casual country-house visiting, for dancing, for garden parties, for
cricket matches, and many another form of social distraction, but that
the pleasures that remain and grow are the pleasures derived from books,
from the sights and sounds of nature, from sympathetic conversation,
from music, and from active physical exercise in the open air. It is
my belief that a man is happiest who is so far employed that he has to
scheme to secure a certain share of such pleasures. My own life unhappily
is so ordered that it is the other way—that I have to scheme to secure
sufficient activities to make such pleasure wholesome. But I am stern
with myself. At times when I find the zest of simple home pleasures
deserting me, I have sufficient self-control deliberately to spend a week
in London, which I detest, or to pay a duty-visit where I am so acutely
and sharply bored by a dull society—_castigatio mea matutina est_—that I
return with delicious enthusiasm to my own trivial round.

[Sidenote: OUR OWN IMPORTANCE]

I do not flatter myself that I hold any very important place in the
world’s economy. But I believe that I have humbly contributed somewhat to
the happiness of others, and I find that the reward for thwarted, wasted
ambitions has come in the shape of a daily increasing joy in quiet things
and tender simplicities. I need not reiterate the fact that I draw from
Nature, ever more and more, the most unfailing and the purest joy; and
if I have forfeited some of the deepest and most thrilling emotions of
the human heart, it is but what thousands are compelled to do; and it is
something to find that the heart can be sweet and tranquil without them.
The only worth of these pages must rest in the fact that the life which
I have tried to depict is made up of elements which are within the reach
of all or nearly all human beings. And though I cannot claim to have
invented a religious system, or to have originated any new or startling
theory of existence, yet I have proved by experiment that a life beset
by many disadvantages, and deprived of most of the stimulus that to some
would seem essential, need not drift into being discontented or evil or
cold or hard.




33


                                                         _Oct. 22, 1898._

That is, so to speak, the outside of my life, the front that is turned
to the world. May I for a brief moment open the doors that lead to the
secret rooms of the spirit?

The greater part of mankind trouble themselves little enough about the
eternal questions: what we are, and what we shall be hereafter. Life to
the strong, energetic, the full-blooded gives innumerable opportunities
of forgetting. It is easy to swim with the stream, to take no thought of
the hills which feed the quiet source of it, or the sea to which it runs;
for such as these it is enough to live. But all whose minds are restless,
whose imagination is constructive, who have to face some dreary and
aching present, and would so gladly take refuge in the future and nestle
in the arms of faith, if they could but find her—for these the obstinate
question must come. Like the wind of heaven it rises. We may shut it
out, trim the lamp, pile the fire, and lose ourselves in pleasant and
complacent activities; but in the intervals of our work, when we drop
the book or lay down the pen, the gust rises shrill and sharp round the
eaves, the gale buffets in the chimney, and we cannot drown the echo in
our hearts.

This is the question:—

Is our life a mere fortuitous and evanescent thing? Is consciousness a
mere symptom of matter under certain conditions? Do we begin and end? Are
the intense emotions and attachments, the joys and sorrows of life, the
agonies of loss, the hungering love with which we surround the faces,
the voices, the forms of those we love, the chords which vibrate in us
at the thought of vanished days, and places we have loved—the old house,
the family groups assembled, the light upon the quiet fields at evening,
the red sunset behind the elms—all those purest, sweetest, most poignant
memories—are these all unsubstantial phenomena like the rainbow or the
dawn, subjective, transitory, moving as the wayfarer moves?

Who can tell us?

Some would cast themselves upon the Gospel—but to me it seems that Jesus
spoke of these things rarely, dimly, in parables—and that though He
takes for granted the continuity of existence, He deliberately withheld
the knowledge of the conditions under which it continues. He spoke, it is
true, in the story of Dives and Lazarus, of a future state, of the bosom
of Abraham where the spirit rested like a tired child upon his father’s
knee—of the great gulf that could not be crossed except by the voices
and gestures of the spirits—but will any one maintain that He was not
using the forms of current allegory, and that He intended this parable
as an eschatological solution? Again He spoke of the final judgment in a
pastoral image.

[Sidenote: IDENTITY]

Enough, some faithful souls may say, upon which to rest the hope of the
preservation of human identity. Alas! I must confess with a sigh, it is
not enough for me. I see the mass of His teaching directed to life, and
the issues of the moment; I seem to see Him turn His back again and again
on the future, and wave His followers away. Is it conceivable that if He
could have said, in words unmistakable and precise, “You have before you,
when the weary body closes its eyes on the world, an existence in which
perception is as strong or stronger, identity as clearly defined, memory
as real, though as swift as when you lived—and this too unaccompanied
by any of the languors or failures or traitorous inheritance of the
poor corporal frame,”—is it conceivable, I say, that if He could have
said this, He would have held His peace, and spoken only through dark
hints, dim allegories, shadowy imaginings. Could a message of peace more
strong, more vital, more tremendous have been given to the world? To have
satisfied the riddles of the sages, the dream of philosophers, the hopes
of the ardent—to have allayed the fears of the timid the heaviness of the
despairing; to have dried the mourner’s tears—all in a moment. And He did
not!

What then _can_ we believe? I can answer but for myself.

I believe with my whole heart and soul in the indestructibility of life
and spirit. Even _matter_ to my mind seems indestructible—and matter is,
I hold, less real than the motions and activities of the spirit.

It has sometimes seemed to me that matter may afford us the missing
analogy: when the body dies, it sinks softly and resistlessly into the
earth, and is carried on the wings of the wind, in the silent speeding
fountains, to rise again in ceaseless interchange of form.

[Sidenote: INDIVIDUALITY]

Could it be so with life and spirit? As the fountain casts the jet
high into the air over the glimmering basin, and the drops separate
themselves for a prismatic instant—when their separate identity seems
unquestioned—and then rejoin the parent wave, could not life and spirit
slip back as it were into some vast reservoir of life, perhaps to linger
there awhile, to lose by peaceful self-surrender, happy intermingling,
by cool and tranquil fusion the dust, the stain, the ghastly taint of
suffering and sin? I know not, but I think it may be so.

But if I could affirm the other—that the spirit passes onwards through
realms undreamed of, in gentle unstained communion, not only with those
whom one has loved, but with all whom one ever would have loved, lost in
sweet wonder at the infinite tenderness and graciousness of God—would it
not in one single instant give me the peace I cannot find, and make life
into a radiant antechamber leading to a vision of rapturous delight?




34


                                                         _Sep. 18, 1900._

How can I write what has befallen me? the double disaster that has cut
like a knife into my life. Was one, I asked myself, the result of the
other, sent to me to show that I ought to have been content with what I
had, that I ought not to have stretched out my hand to the fruit that
hung too high above me. I am too feeble in mind and body to do more
than briefly record the incidents that have struck me down. I feel like
a shipwrecked sailor who, flung on an unhospitable shore, had with
infinite labour and desperate toil dragged a few necessaries out of the
floating fragments of the wreck, and piled them carefully and patiently
on a ledge out of the reach of the tide, only to find after a night of
sudden storm the little store scattered and himself swimming faintly in
a raging sea—that sea which the evening before had sunk into so sweet,
so caressing a repose, and now like a grey monster aroused to sudden
fury, howls and beats for leagues against the stony promontories and the
barren beaches.

[Sidenote: NEW FRIENDS]

I had been in very tranquil spirits and strong health all the summer;
my maladies had ceased to trouble me, and for weeks they were out of my
thoughts. I had found a quiet zest in the little duties that make up my
simple life. I had made, too, a new friend. A pleasant cottage about
half a mile from Golden End had been taken by the widow of a clergyman
with small but sufficient means, who settled there with her daughter,
the latter being about twenty-four. I went somewhat reluctantly with
my mother to call upon them and offer neighbourly assistance. I found
myself at once in the presence of two refined, cultivated, congenial
people. Mrs. Waring, I saw, was not only a well-read woman, interested in
books and art, but she had seen something of society, and had a shrewd
and humorous view of men and things. Miss Waring was like her mother;
but I soon found that to her mother’s kindly and brisk intellect she
added a peculiar and noble insight—that critical power, if I may call
it so, which sees what is beautiful and true in life, and strips it of
adventitious and superficial disguises in the same way that one with a
high appreciation of literature moves instinctively to what is gracious
and lofty, and is never misled by talent or unobservant of genius. The
society of these two became to me in a few weeks a real and precious
possession. I began to see how limited and self-centred my life had begun
to be. They did not, so to speak, provide me with new sensations and new
material so much as put the whole of life in a new light. I found in the
mother a wise and practical counsellor, with a singular grasp of detail,
with whom I could discuss any new book I had read or any article that had
struck me; but with Miss Waring it was different. I can only say that her
wise and simple heart cast a new light upon the most familiar thoughts.
I found myself understood, helped, lifted, in a way that both humiliated
and inspired me. Moreover, I was privileged to be admitted into near
relations with one who seemed to show, without the least consciousness of
it, the best and highest possibilities that lie in human nature. I cannot
guess or define the secret. I only know that it dawned upon me gradually
that here was a human spirit fed like a spring from the purest rains
that fall on some purple mountain-head.

[Sidenote: THE MOMENT]

By what soft and unsuspected degrees my feeling of congenial friendship
grew into a deeper devotion I cannot now trace. It must now in my
miserable loneliness be enough to say that so it was. Only a few days
ago—and yet the day seems already to belong to a remote past, and to be
separated from these last dark hours by a great gulf, misty, not to be
passed,—I realised that a new power had come into my life—the heavenly
power that makes all things new. I had gone down to the cottage in a
hot, breathless sunlight afternoon. I had long passed the formality
of ringing to announce my entrance. There was no one in the little
drawing-room, which was cool and dark, with shuttered windows. I went
out upon the lawn. Miss Waring was sitting in a chair under a beech tree
reading, and at the sight of me she rose, laid down her book, and came
smiling across the grass. There is a subtle, viewless message of the
spirit which flashes between kindred souls, in front of and beyond the
power of look or speech, and at the same moment that I understood I felt
she understood too. I could not then at once put into words my hopes;
but it hardly seemed necessary. We sat together, we spoke a little, but
were mostly silent in some secret interchange of spirit. That afternoon
my heart climbed, as it were, a great height, and saw from a Pisgah top
the familiar land at its feet, all lit with a holy radiance, and then
turning, saw, in golden gleams and purple haze, the margins of an unknown
sea stretching out beyond the sunset to the very limits of the world.




35


                                                         _Sep. 19, 1900._

That night, in a kind of rapturous peace, I faced the new hope. Even
then, in that august hour, I reflected whether I could, with my broken
life and faded dreams, link a spirit so fair to mine. I can truthfully
say that I was full to the brim of the intensest gratitude, the tenderest
service; but I thought was it just, was it right, with little or nothing
to offer, to seek to make so large a claim upon so beautiful a soul? I
did not doubt that I could win it, and that love would be lavished in
fullest measure to me. But I strove with all my might to see whether such
a hope was not on my part a piece of supreme and shameful selfishness. I
probed the very depths of my being, and decided that I might dare; that
God had given me this precious, this adorable gift, and that I might
consecrate my life and heart to love and be worthy of it if I could.

So I sank to sleep, and woke to the shock of a rapture such as I did
not believe this world could hold. It was a still warm day of late
summer, but a diviner radiance lay over garden, field, and wood for me.
I determined I would not speak to my mother till after I had received my
answer.

After breakfast I went out to the garden—the flowers seemed to smile and
nod their heads at me, leaning with a kind of tender brilliance to greet
me; in a thick bush I heard the flute-notes of my favourite thrush—the
brisk chirruping of the sparrows came from the ivied gable.

What was it?... what was the strange, rending, numbing shock that ran so
suddenly through me, making me in a moment doubtful, as it seemed, even
of my own identity—again it came—again. I raised my eyes, it seemed as
if I had never seen the garden, the house, the trees before. Then came a
pang of such grim horror that I felt as though stabbed with a sword. I
seemed, if that is possible, almost to smell and taste pain. I staggered
a few steps back to the garden entrance—I remember crying out faintly,
and my voice seemed strange to me—there was a face at the door—and then a
blackness closed round me and I knew no more.




36


                                                         _Sep. 20, 1900._

I woke at last, swimming upwards, like a diver out of a deep sea, from
some dark abyss of weakness. I opened my eyes—I saw that I was in a
downstairs room, where it seemed that a bed must have been improvised;
but at first I was too weak even to inquire with myself what had
happened. My mother sate by me, with a look on her face that I had never
seen; but I could not care. I seemed to have passed a ford, and to see
life from the other side; to have shut a door upon it, and to be looking
at it from the dark window. I neither cared nor hoped nor felt. I only
wished to lie undisturbed—not to be spoken to or noticed, only to lie.

I revived a little, and the faint flow of life brought back with it, as
upon a creeping tide, a regret that I had opened my eyes upon the world
again—that was my first thought. I had been so near the dark passage—the
one terrible thing that lies in front of all living things—why had I not
been permitted to cross it once and for all; why was I recalled to hope,
to suffering, to fear? Then, as I grew stronger, came a fuller regret for
the good, peaceful days. I had asked, I thought, so little of life, and
that little had been denied. Then as I grew stronger still, there came
the thought of the great treasure that had been within my grasp, and my
spirit faintly cried out against the fierce injustice of the doom. But I
soon fell into a kind of dimness of thought, from which even now I can
hardly extricate myself—a numbness of heart, an indifference to all but
the fact that from moment to moment I am free from pain.




37


                                                         _Sep. 21, 1900._

I am climbing, climbing, hour by hour, slowly and cautiously, out of the
darkness, as a man climbs up some dizzy crag, never turning his head—yet
not back to life! I shall not achieve that.

How strange it would seem to others that I can care to write thus—it
seems strange even to myself. If ever, in life, I looked on to these
twilight hours, with the end coming slowly nearer, I thought I should
lie in a kind of stupor of mind and body, indifferent to everything. I
am indifferent, with the indifference of one in whom desire seems to be
dead; but my mind is, or seems, almost preternaturally clear; and the
old habit, of trying to analyse, to describe, anything that I see or
realise distinctly is too strong for me. I have asked for pencil and
paper; they demur, but yield; and so I write a little, which relieves the
occasional physical restlessness I feel; it induces a power of tranquil
reverie, and the hours pass, I hardly know how. The light changes; the
morning freshness becomes the grave and solid afternoon, and so dies
into twilight; till out of the dark alleys steals the gentle evening,
dark-eyed and with the evening star tangled in her hair, full of shy
sweet virginal thoughts and mysteries ... and then the night, and the day
again.

Do I grieve, do I repine, do I fear? No, I can truthfully say, I do
not. I hardly seem to feel. Almost the only feeling left me is the old
childlike trustfulness in mother and nurse. I do not seem to need to tell
them anything. One or other sits near me. I feel my mother’s eyes dwell
upon me, till I look up and smile; but between our very minds there runs,
as it were, an airy bridge, on which the swift thoughts, the messengers
of love, speed to and fro. I seem, in the loss of all the superstructure
and fabric of life, to have nothing left to tie me to the world, but
this sense of unity with my mother—that inseparable, elemental tie that
nothing can break. And she, I know, feels this too; and it gives her,
though she could not describe it, a strange elation in the midst of her
sorrow, the joy that a man is born into the world, and that I am hers.

[Sidenote: A MOTHER’S HEART]

With the beloved nurse it is the same in a sense; but here it is not
the deep inextricable bond of blood, but the bond of perfect love. I
lose myself in wonder in thinking of it; that one who is hired—that
is the strange basis of the relationship—for a simple task, should
become absolutely identified with love, with those whom she serves. I
do not believe that Susan has a single thought or desire in the world
that is not centred on my mother or myself. The tie between us is
simply indissoluble. And I feel that if we wandered, we three spirits,
disconsolate and separate, through the trackless solitudes of heaven, she
would _somehow_ find her way to my side.

I have noticed that since my illness began she has slipped into the
use of little nursery phrases which I have not heard for years; I
have become “Master Henry” again, and am told to “look slippy” about
taking my medicine. This would have moved me in other days with a
sense of pathos; it is not so now, though the knowledge that these two
beloved, sweet-minded, loving women suffer, is the one shadow over my
tranquillity. If I could only explain to them that my sadness for their
sorrow is drowned in my wonder at the strangeness that any one should
ever sorrow at all for anything!




38


                                                         _Sep. 22, 1900._

To-day I am calmer, and the hours have been passing in a long reverie;
I have been thinking quietly over the past years. Sometimes, as I lay
with eyes closed, the old life came so near me that it almost seemed as
if men and women and children, some of them dead and gone, had sate by
me and spoken to me; little scenes and groups out of early years that I
thought I had forgotten suddenly shaped themselves. It is as if my will
had abdicated its sway, and the mind, like one who is to remove from a
house in which he had long dwelt, is turning over old stores, finding old
relics long laid aside in cupboards and lumber-rooms, and seeing them
without sorrow, only lingering with a kind of tender remoteness over the
sweet and fragrant associations of the days that are dead.

I have never doubted that I am to die, and to-day it seems as though I
cared little when the parting comes; death does not seem to me now like
a sharp close to life, the yawning of a dark pit; but, as in an allegory,
I seem to see a little dim figure, leaving a valley full of sunlight and
life, and going upwards into misty and shapeless hills. I used to wonder
whether death was an end, an extinction—_now_ that seems impossible—my
life and thought seem so strong, so independent of the frail physical
accompaniments of the body; but even if it is an end, the thought does
not afflict me. I am in the Father’s hands. It is He that hath made us.




39


                                                         _Sep. 24, 1900._

I have had an interview with her. I hardly know what we said—very
little—she understood, and it was very peaceful in her presence. I tried
to tell her not to be sorry; for indeed the one thing that seems to me
inconceivable is that any one should grieve. I lie like a boat upon a
quiet tide, drifting out to sea—the sea to which we must all drift. I am
thankful for my life and all its sweetness; the shadows have gone, and it
seems to me now as though all the happiness came from God, and all the
shadow was of my own making. And the strangest thought of all is that the
darkest shadow has always been this very passing which now seems to me
the most natural thing in the world—indeed the only true thing.

None the less am I thankful for this great and crowning gift of love—the
one thing that I had missed. I do not now even want to use it, to enjoy
it—it is there, and that is enough. In her presence it seemed to me that
Love stood side by side with Death, two shining sisters. But yesterday I
murmured over having been given, as it were, so sweet a cup to taste, and
then having the cup dashed from my lips. To-day I see that Love was the
crown of my poor life, and I thank God with all the strength of my spirit
for putting it into my hand as His last and best gift.

And I thanked her too for deigning to love me; and even while I did so,
the thought broke to pieces, as it were, and escaped from the feeble
words in which I veiled it, like a moth bursting from a cocoon. For were
we not each other’s before the world was made? And the thought of myself
and herself fled from me, and we were one spirit, thinking the same
thoughts, sustained by the same strength. One more word I said, and bade
her believe that I said it with undimmed and unblunted mind, that she
must live, and cast abroad by handfuls the love she would have garnered
for me; that the sorrow that lay heavy on her heart must be fruitful, not
a devastating sorrow; and that however much alone she might seem, that I
should be there, like one who kneels without a closed door ... and so we
said farewell.

[Sidenote: NEARLY HOME]

I lie now in my own room—it is evening; through the open window I can see
the dark-stemmed trees, the pigeon-cotes, the shadowy shoulder of the
barn, the soft ridges beyond, the little wood-end that I saw once in the
early dawn and thought so beautiful. When I saw it before it seemed to me
like the gate of the unknown country; will my hovering spirit pass that
way? I have lived my little life—and my heart goes out to all of every
tribe and nation under the sun who are still in the body. I would tell
them with my last breath that there is comfort to the end—that there is
nothing worth fretting over or being heavy-hearted about it; that the
Father’s arm is strong, and that his Heart is very wide.
